# Writing a simple MLIR pass

The second chapter of this tutorial describes the implementation of a simple transformation pass in Dynamatic. This pass operates on *Handshake*-level IR and simplifies merge-like operations to make our dataflow circuits faster and smaller. We will 
1. declare the pass in [TableGen](https://llvm.org/docs/TableGen/), which will automatically generate a lot of boilerplate C++ code at compile-time,
2. declare a header for the pass that includes some auto-generated code and declares the pass constructor,
3. implement the pass constructor and its skeleton using some of the auto-generated code, 
3. configure the project to be able to run our pass with `dynamatic-opt`, the Dynamatic optimizer, 
4. and, finally, implement our circuit transformation.

You can write the entire pass yourself from the code snippets provided in this tutorial. The write-up assumes that no files related to the pass exist initially and walks you through the creation and implementation of those files. However, the full source code for this tutorial is provided in `tutorials/CreatingPasses/include/tutorials/CreatingPasses` and `tutorials/CreatingPasses/lib/CreatingPasses` for reference. To avoid name clashes while easily matching between the reference code and the code you may choose to write while reading this tutorial, all relevant names will be prefixed by `My` in the snippets present in this file compared to names used in the reference code. For example, the pass will be named `MySimplifyMergeLike` in this tutorial whereas it is named `SimplifyMergeLike` in the reference code. 

The project is configured to build all tutorials along the rest of the project. By the end of this chapter, you will be able to run your own pass using Dynamatic's optimizer!

## Declaring our pass in TableGen

The first step in the creation of our pass is to declare it inside a TableGen file (with `.td` extension). [TableGen](https://llvm.org/docs/TableGen/) is an LLVM tool whose *"purpose is to help a human develop and maintain records of domain-specific information"*. For our purposes, we can see TableGen as a preprocessor that inputs text files (with the `.td` extension by convention) containing information on user-defined MLIR entities (e.g., compiler passes, dialect operations, etc.) and outputs automatically-generated boilerplate C++ code that "implements" these entities. TableGen's input format is mostly declarative; it *declares* the existence of entities and characterizes their properties, but largely does not directly describe how these entities *behave*. The behavior of TableGen-defined entities must be written in C++, which we will do in the following sections. For this tutorial, we will have TableGen automatically generate the C++ code corresponding to our pass declaration. TableGen will also automatically generate a registration function that will enable the Dynamatic optimizer to register and run our pass.

Inside `tutorials/CreatingPasses/include/tutorials/`, which already exists, start by creating a directory named `MyCreatingPasses` which will contain all declarations for this tutorial. It's conventional to put the declaration of all *transformation* passes in a sub-directory called `Transforms`, so create one such directory within `MyCreatingPasses`. Finally, create a TableGen file named `Passes.td` inside that last directory. At this point, the filesystem should look like the following.

```sh
├── tutorials
│   ├── CreatingPasses
│     ├── include 
│         ├── tutorials
│             ├── CreatingPasses # Reference code for this tutorial
│             ├── MyCreatingPasses # The first directory you just created
│                 └── Transforms # The second directory you just created
│                     └── Passes.td # The file you just created
│             ├── CMakeLists.txt
│             └── InitAllPasses.h
│     ├── lib 
│     └── test
├── build.sh 
├── README.md
└── ... # Other files/folders at the top level
```

We will declare our pass inside `Passes.td`. Copy and paste the following snippet into the file.

```tablegen
//===- Passes.td - Transformation passes definition --------*- tablegen -*-===//
//
// This file contains the definition for all transformation passes in this
// tutorial.
//
//===----------------------------------------------------------------------===//

#ifndef TUTORIALS_MYCREATINGPASSES_TRANSFORMS_PASSES_TD
#define TUTORIALS_MYCREATINGPASSES_TRANSFORMS_PASSES_TD

include "mlir/Pass/PassBase.td"

def MySimplifyMergeLike : Pass< "tutorial-handshake-my-simplify-merge-like", 
                                "mlir::ModuleOp"> {
  let summary = "Simplifies merge-like operations in Handshake functions.";
  let description = [{
    The pass performs two simple transformation steps sequentially in each
    Handshake function present in the input MLIR module. First, it bypasses and
    removes all merge operations (circt::handshake::MergeOp) with a single
    operand from the IR, since they serve no purpose. Second, it downgrades all
    control merge operations (circt::handshake::ControlMergeOp) whose index
    result is unused into simpler merges with the same operands.
  }];
  let constructor = "dynamatic::tutorials::createMySimplifyMergeLikePass()";
}

#endif // TUTORIALS_MYCREATINGPASSES_TRANSFORMS_PASSES_TD
```

Let's go over the file's content. You may see that it shares syntactic similarity with C/C++. Like all C++ files in the repository, the file starts with a header comment containing some meta information as well as a description of the file's content. Like a header, it contains an [include guard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Include_guard) (`#ifndef <guard>`/`#define <guard>`/`#endif`) and includes another TableGen file (`include "mlir/Pass/PassBase.td"`, note the lack of a `#` before the `include` keyword). The heart of the file is the declaration of the `MySimplifyMergeLikePass` which inherits from a `Pass`. The `Pass` object is given 2 generic arguments between `<>`.
1. First is the flag name that will reference the pass in the Dynamatic optimizer `tutorial-handshake-my-simplify-merge-like`. Note that the actual flag name will be prefixed by a double-dash, so that it's possible to run the pass on some input *Handshake*-level IR with
    ```sh
    $ ./bin/dynamatic-opt handshake-input.mlir --tutorial-handshake-my-simplify-merge-like
    ```    
2. Second is the MLIR operation that this pass matches on (i.e., the operation type the pass driver will look for in the input to run the pass on). In the vast majority of cases, we want passes to match an `mlir::ModuleOp`, which is always the top level operation under which everything is nested in our MLIR inputs.

The pass declaration contains some pass members which one must always define (there exists other members, but they are out of the scope of this tutorial). These are:
- The `summary`, containing a one-line short description of what the pass does.
- The `description`, containing a more detailed description of what the pass does.
- The `constructor`, indicating the full qualified name of a function that returns a unique instance of the pass. We will declare and define this function in the next sections of this chapter. Notice that we create the function under the `dynamatic::tutorials` namespace. Every public member of Dynamatic should live in the `dynamatic` namespace. As to not pollute the repository's main namespace, everything related to the tutorials is further placed inside the nested `tutorials` namespace.

We now need to write some CMake configuration code to instruct the build system to automatically generate C++ code that corresponds to this TableGen file, and then compile this generated C++ along the rest of the project. First, create a file named `CMakeLists.txt` next to `Passes.td` with the following content.

```CMake
set(LLVM_TARGET_DEFINITIONS Passes.td)
mlir_tablegen(Passes.h.inc -gen-pass-decls)
add_public_tablegen_target(DynamaticTutorialsMyCreatingPassesIncGen)
add_dependencies(dynamatic-headers DynamaticTutorialsMyCreatingPassesIncGen)
```

You do not need to understand precisely how this works. It suffices to know that it instructs the build system to create a target named `DynamaticTutorialsMyCreatingPassesIncGen` that libraries can depend on to get definitions related to `Passes.td`'s content. To get this file included in the build when running `$ cmake ...`, we must include its parent directory from CMake files higher in the hierarchy. Modify the existing `CMakeLists.txt` in `tutorials/CreatingPasses` to add the subdirectory we just created.

```CMake
include_directories(include)
include_directories(${DYNAMATIC_BINARY_DIR}/tutorials/CreatingPasses/include)

add_subdirectory(include/tutorials/CreatingPasses)
add_subdirectory(include/tutorials/MyCreatingPasses)   # you need to add this.
add_subdirectory(lib)

```

Similarly, create another `CMakeLists.txt` in `tutorials/CreatingPasses/include/tutorial/MyCreatingPasses` to include add nested subdirectory we created.

```CMake
add_subdirectory(Transforms)
```

Everything we just did will eventually automatically generate a C++ header corresponding to `Passes.td`. It will be created inside the `build` directory (`build/tutorials/CreatingPasses/include/tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/Passes.h.inc`) and will contain a lot of boilerplate code that you will rarely ever have to look at. Re-building the project right now would not generate the header because the build system would be able to identify that no part of the framework depends on it yet. We will see how to include parts of this header file inside our own C++ code using preprocessor flags in the next section, after which building the project will result in the header being genereted.

## Declaring our pass in C++

Now that we got TableGen to generate the boilerplate code for this pass, we can finally start writing some C++ of our own. Create a header file called `MySimplifyMergeLike.h` next to `Passes.td`. We will include the auto-generated pass declaration and declare our pass constructor there using the following code.

```cpp
//===- MySimplifyMergeLike.h - Simplifies merge-like ops --------*- C++ -*-===//
//
// This file declares the --tutorial-handshake-my-simplify-merge-like pass.
//
//===----------------------------------------------------------------------===//

#ifndef TUTORIALS_MYCREATINGPASSES_TRANSFORMS_MYSIMPLIFYMERGELIKE_H
#define TUTORIALS_MYCREATINGPASSES_TRANSFORMS_MYSIMPLIFYMERGELIKE_H

#include "dynamatic/Support/LLVM.h"
#include "mlir/Pass/Pass.h"

namespace dynamatic {
namespace tutorials {

#define GEN_PASS_DECL_MYSIMPLIFYMERGELIKE
#define GEN_PASS_DEF_MYSIMPLIFYMERGELIKE
#include "tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/Passes.h.inc"

std::unique_ptr<mlir::OperationPass<mlir::ModuleOp>>
createMySimplifyMergeLikePass();

} // namespace tutorials
} // namespace dynamatic

#endif // TUTORIALS_MYCREATINGPASSES_TRANSFORMS_MYSIMPLIFYMERGELIKE_H
```

Beyond the standard C++ header structure, this file does two important things.
1.  It includes the auto-generated pass declaration code inside the `dynamatic::tutorials` namespace. 
    ```cpp
    #define GEN_PASS_DECL_MYSIMPLIFYMERGELIKE
    #define GEN_PASS_DEF_MYSIMPLIFYMERGELIKE
    #include "tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/Passes.h.inc"
    ```
    Notice the preprocessor flag defined just before including the file. It serves the purpose of isolating a single part of the auto-generated header to include in our own header, here the declaration of our pass. The preprocessor's flag name is also auto-generated using the `GEN_PASS_[DEF|DECL]_<my_pass_name_in_all_caps>` template. If we were to define more passes inside `Passes.td`, all of them would get a declaration inside `"tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/Passes.h.inc"`. This preprocessor flag allows us to pick the single declaration we care about in the context.
2.  It declares our pass's constructor function, whose name we declared inside `Passes.td`. Do not pay much attention to the constructor's complicated-looking return type at this point, it is in fact trivial to implement this function.

## Implementing the skeleton of our pass

We are now ready to start implementing our circuit transformation! We first write down some boilerplate skeleton code and configure CMake to build our implementation.

Inside `tutorials/CreatingPasses/lib/`, which already exists, start by creating two nested directories named `MyCreatingPasses/Transforms` (notice that the file structure is the same as in the `tutorials/CreatingPasses/include/tutorials/` directory). Now, create a C++ source file named `MySimplifyMergeLike.cpp` inside the nested directory you just created to contain the implementation of our pass. Copy and paste the following code inside the source file.

```cpp
//===- MySimplifyMergeLike.cpp - Simplifies merge-like ops ------*- C++ -*-===//
//
// Implements the --tutorial-handshake-my-simplify-merge-like pass, which uses a
// simple OpBuilder object to modify the IR within each handshake function.
//
//===----------------------------------------------------------------------===//

#include "tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/MySimplifyMergeLike.h"
#include "dynamatic/Dialect/Handshake/HandshakeOps.h"
#include "mlir/IR/BuiltinOps.h"
#include "mlir/IR/MLIRContext.h"

using namespace mlir;
using namespace dynamatic;

namespace {

/// Simple pass driver for our merge-like simplification transformation. At this
/// point it only prints a message to stdout.
struct MySimplifyMergeLikePass
    : public dynamatic::tutorials::impl::MySimplifyMergeLikeBase<
          MySimplifyMergeLikePass> {

  void runOnOperation() override {
    // Get the MLIR context for the current operation being transformed
    MLIRContext *ctx = &getContext();
    // Get the operation being transformed (the top level module)
    ModuleOp mod = getOperation();
    // Print a message on stdout to prove that the pass is running 
    llvm::outs() << "My pass is running!\n";
  };
};
} // namespace

namespace dynamatic {
namespace tutorials {

/// Returns a unique pointer to an operation pass that matches MLIR modules. In
/// our case, this is simply an instance of our unparameterized
/// MySimplifyMergeLikePass driver.
std::unique_ptr<mlir::OperationPass<mlir::ModuleOp>>
createMySimplifyMergeLikePass() {
  return std::make_unique<MySimplifyMergeLikePass>();
}
} // namespace tutorials
} // namespace dynamatic
```

Let's take a close look at the content of this source file, which for now only contains the skeleton of our pass. At the very bottom, we see the definition of our pass constructor that we declared in `MySimplifyMergeLike.h`. It simply returns a unique pointer to an instance of a `MySimplifyMergeLikePass`, which is a struct defined above inside an anonymous namespace. You can view this struct as the driver for our pass, and an instance of `MySimplifyMergeLikePass` as a particular instance of our pass. Let's break down the struct declaration and definition.
-   The struct declaration is quite verbose, but it will always have the same structure for any pass you implement.
    ```cpp
    struct MySimplifyMergeLikePass
    : public dynamatic::tutorials::impl::MySimplifyMergeLikeBase<
          MySimplifyMergeLikePass> {...}
    ```
    The name `MySimplifyMergeLikePass` does not have any particular importance, but it is conventional to use the pass name as declared in the TableGen file (that we created in [this section](#declaring-our-pass-in-tablegen)) suffixed by `Pass`. The struct inherits from `MySimplifyMergeLikeBase`, which is defined inside the `dynamatic::tutorials::impl` namespace. You may not remember defining this class anywhere. This is because it is the pass declaration that was auto-generated from TableGen inside `"tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/Passes.h.inc"` and included from `MySimplifyMergeLike.h`, which the source file then includes. The name `MySimplifyMergeLikeBase` is auto-generated from the pass name declared in the TableGen file, to which `Base` is suffixed (it is the *base class* we inherit from). Finally, the base class is templated using... the derived struct's itself? This may seem counter-intuitive, and you may wonder how this could even compile, but it is in fact a well-known C++ idiom called the [*curiously recurring template pattern*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curiously_recurring_template_pattern) that is used throughout MLIR.
-   The struct overrides a single method named `runOnOperation`. It is the method that will be called on each `mlir::ModuleOp` found in the input IR, since we declared our pass (in `Passes.td`) to match this operation type. Right now, the method just retrieves the current MLIR context and operation it was matched on, and prints a message to standard output. In the next section, we will implement our circuit transformation within this method.
## Running our pass

### Configuring CMake

We now configure CMake to build this pass along the rest of the project. We have to create a `CMakeLists.txt` file in each directory we created and modify the one at `tutorials/CreatingPasses/lib`. Starting with the latter, just add a line to include the new directory structure in the build.

```CMake
add_subdirectory(CreatingPasses)
add_subdirectory(MyCreatingPasses)
```

Similarly, inside `lib/MyCreatingPasses/CMakeLists.txt`, just write the following to include the `Transforms` subdirectory, where our pass implemenation lies.

```CMake
add_subdirectory(Transforms)
```

Finally, add the following snippet to `lib/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/CMakeLists.txt`.

```CMake
add_dynamatic_library(DynamaticTutorialsMyCreatingPasses
  MySimplifyMergeLike.cpp

  DEPENDS
  DynamaticTutorialsMyCreatingPassesIncGen

  LINK_LIBS PUBLIC
  MLIRIR
  MLIRSupport
  MLIRTransformUtils
)
```

This CMake file creates a new Dynamatic library called `DynamaticTutorialsMyCreatingPasses`, which includes our pass implementation (`MySimplifyMergeLike.cpp`) and depends on `DynamaticTutorialsMyCreatingPassesIncGen` (the TableGen target we created earlier in `tutorials/CreatingPasses/include/tutorials/CreatingPasses/Transforms/CMakeLists.txt`) as well as a couple of standard MLIR targets which are built as part of our software dependencies.

The last CMake step is to add your new dynamatic library to the optimizer by modifying `tools/dynamatic-opt/CMakeLists.txt`. This will allow the optimizer to include your pass implementation in its binary. Add your library to the list of existing libraries that the `dynamatic-opt` tool gets linked to as follows.

```CMake
target_link_libraries(dynamatic-opt
  PRIVATE
  DynamaticTransforms
  DynamaticTutorialsCreatingPasses
  DynamaticTutorialsMyCreatingPasses # your library!

  <... other libraries>
)
```

### Registering our pass

To be able to run a pass, the optimizer needs to register it at compile-time. The tool is already configured to register all tutorial passes by calling the `dynamatic::tutorials::registerAllPasses()` function located in `tutorials/CreatingPasses/include/tutorials/InitAllPasses.h`, so we just have to add our own pass to this function. To do that, first create a file named `Passes.h` inside `tutorials/CreatingPasses/include/tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/`, and paste the following into it.

```cpp
//===- Passes.h - Transformation passes registration ------------*- C++ -*-===//
//
// This file contains declarations to register transformation passes.
//
//===----------------------------------------------------------------------===//

#ifndef TUTORIALS_MYCREATINGAPASSES_TRANSFORMS_PASSES_H
#define TUTORIALS_MYCREATINGAPASSES_TRANSFORMS_PASSES_H

#include "dynamatic/Support/LLVM.h"
#include "mlir/Pass/Pass.h"
#include "tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/MySimplifyMergeLike.h"

namespace dynamatic {
namespace tutorials {

namespace MyCreatingPasses {

/// Generate the code for registering passes.
#define GEN_PASS_REGISTRATION
#include "tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/Passes.h.inc"

} // namespace MyCreatingPasses
} // namespace tutorials
} // namespace dynamatic

#endif // TUTORIALS_MYCREATINGAPASSES_TRANSFORMS_PASSES_H
```

Similarly to `MySimplifyMergeLike.h`, this file includes some auto-generated code from `"tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/Passes.h.inc"`. This time, however, the `GEN_PASS_REGISTRATION` pre-processor flag indicates that the pass registration functions should be included instead of the pass declarations.

Next, open `tutorials/CreatingPasses/include/tutorials/InitAllPasses.h` and add the file you just created to the list of include statements.
```cpp
#include "tutorials/MyCreatingPasses/Transforms/Passes.h"
```
Finally, inside the file `tutorials/CreatingPasses/include/tutorials/CreatingPasses/InitAllPasses.h` in the function `registerAllPasses`, add the following line to register your pass using the auto-generated `registerPasses` method.
```cpp
dynamatic::tutorials::MyCreatingPasses::registerPasses();
```

We created a lot of directories and files in the last two sections, so let's recap what our file system should look like at this point. 

```sh
├── tutorials
│   ├── CreatingPasses
│     ├── include 
│         └── tutorials
│             ├── CreatingPasses # Reference code for this tutorial
│             ├── MyCreatingPasses
│                 ├── CMakeLists.txt
│                 └── Transforms
│                     ├── CMakeLists.txt 
│                     ├── MySimplifyMergeLike.h 
│                     ├── Passes.td
│                     └── Passes.h # The file you just created
│             ├── CMakeLists.txt
│             └── InitAllPasses.h # Modified just now to register your pass
│     ├── lib
│         ├── CMakeLists.txt # Modified to add_subdirectory(MyCreatingPasses)
│         ├── CreatingPasses # Reference code for this tutorial
│         └── MyCreatingPasses # All created by you
│             ├── CMakeLists.txt # add_subdirectory(Transforms)
│             └── Transforms
│                     ├── CMakeLists.txt # add_dynamatic_library(...)
│                     └── MySimplifyMergeLike.cpp # Pass skeleton
│     └── test
├── build.sh 
├── README.md
└── ... # Other files/folders at the top level
```

You should now be able to compile your skeleton pass implementation using the repository's build script (`./build.sh`, from the top-level directory). Once successfully compiled, and to verify that everything works as intended, try to run your pass on the test file located at `tutorials/test/creating-passes.mlir` using the following command (run from the repository's top level).
```sh
$ ./bin/dynamatic-opt tutorials/CreatingPasses/test/creating-passes.mlir --tutorial-handshake-my-simplify-merge-like
```
On stdout, you should see printed the message we put into the pass (*My pass is running!*) as well as the MLIR input. The optimizer's behavior is to print out the transformed IR after going through all passes. Our pass performs no IR modification at this point, so the input IR gets printed unmodified.

Congratulations on successfully building your own pass! It may seem like a long (and somewhat boilerplate) process but, once you are used to it, it takes only 5 to 10 minutes to setup a pass as these steps are mostly the same for all passes you will ever write. Also keep in mind that you usually won't have to do all of what we just did, since most of the time all the basic infrastructure (i.e., the Tablegen file, some of the headers, the `CMakeLists.txt` files) is already there. In those cases you would just have to declare an additional pass inside a `Passes.td` file, add a header/source file pair for your new pass, and include your pass's header inside an already existing `Passes.h` file. We we will do exactly that in the [next chapter](3.GreedyPatternRewriting.md).

## Implementing our transformation

It's finally time to write our circuit transformation! In this section, we will just be modifying `MySimplifyMergeLike.cpp`. As this tutorial is mostly about the pass creation process rather than MLIR's IR transformation capabilities, we will not go into the details of how to interact with MLIR data-structures. Instead, see the [MLIR primer](../MLIRPrimer.md) for an introduction to these concepts. 

Start by modifying the `runOnOperation` method inside `MySimplifyMergeLikePass` to call a helper function that will perform the transformation for each handshake function (`circt::handshake::FuncOp`) in the current MLIR module.

```cpp
void runOnOperation() override {
  // Get the MLIR context for the current operation being transformed
  MLIRContext *ctx = &getContext();
  // Get the operation being transformed (the top level module)
  ModuleOp mod = getOperation();

  // Iterate over all Handshake functions in the module
  for (handshake::FuncOp funcOp : mod.getOps<handshake::FuncOp>())
    // Perform the simple transformation individually on each function. In
    // case the transformation fails for at least a function, the pass should
    // be considered failed
    if (failed(performSimplification(funcOp, ctx)))
      return signalPassFailure();
}
```

We iterate over all handshake functions in the module using `mod.getOps<circt::handshake::FuncOp>()` and simplify each of them sequentially using the `performSimplification` function, which we will write next. In case the transformation fails for a function, we tell the optimizer by calling `signalPassFailure()` and returning. On receiving this signal, the optimizer will stop processing the IR (cancelling any pass that was supposed to run after ours) and return.

Now, create the skeleton of the function that will perform our transformation outside and above of the anonymous namespace that contains `MySimplifyMergeLikePass`.

```cpp
/// Performs the simple transformation on the provided Handshake function,
/// deleting merges with a single input and downgrades control merges with an
/// unused index result into simpler merges.
static LogicalResult performSimplification(handshake::FuncOp funcOp,
                                           MLIRContext *ctx) {
  // Create an operation builder to allow us to create and insert new operation
  // inside the function
  OpBuilder builder(ctx);

  return success();
}
```

The function returns a `LogicalResult`, which is the conventional MLIR type to indicate success (`return success();`) or failure (`return failure();`). At this point, the function just creates an *operation builder* (`OpBuilder`) from the passed MLIR context, which will enable us to create/insert/erase operation from the IR.

Now, add the code of the first transformation step ([*single-input merge erasure*](1.SimplifyingMergeLikeOps.md#erasing-single-input-merges)) inside the function. 

```cpp
static LogicalResult performSimplification(handshake::FuncOp funcOp,
                                           MLIRContext *ctx) {
  OpBuilder builder(ctx);

  // Erase all merges with a single input
  for (handshake::MergeOp mergeOp :
        llvm::make_early_inc_range(funcOp.getOps<handshake::MergeOp>())) {
    if (mergeOp->getNumOperands() == 1) {
      // Replace all occurences of the merge's single result throughout the IR
      // with the merge's single operand. This is equivalent to bypassing the
      // merge
      mergeOp.getResult().replaceAllUsesWith(mergeOp.getOperand(0));
      // Erase the merge operation, whose result now has no uses
      mergeOp.erase();
    }
  }

  return success();
}
```

This simply iterates over all `circt::handshake::MergeOp` inside the function and, if they have a single operand, rewires the circuit to bypass the useless *merge* before deleting the latter. Note that we wrap the `funcOp.getOps<handshake::MergeOp>()` iterator inside a call to `llvm::make_early_inc_range`. This is necessary because we are erasing the current element pointed to by the iterator inside the loop body (by calling `mergeOp.erase()`), which is normally unsafe. `make_early_inc_range` solves this by going to find the next iterator element before returning control to the loop body for the current element. 

Next, add the code for the second transformation step ([*index-less control merge downgrading*](1.SimplifyingMergeLikeOps.md#downgrading-index-less-control-merges)) below the code we just added.

```cpp
static LogicalResult performSimplification(handshake::FuncOp funcOp,
                                           MLIRContext *ctx) {
  // [First transformation here]

  // Replace control merges with an unused index result into merges
  for (handshake::ControlMergeOp cmergeOp :
       llvm::make_early_inc_range(funcOp.getOps<handshake::ControlMergeOp>())) {

    // Get the control merge's index result (second result).
    // Equivalently, we could have written:
    //  auto indexResult = cmergeOp->getResults()[1];
    // but using getIndex() is more readable and maintainable
    Value indexResult = cmergeOp.getIndex();

    // We can only perform the transformation if the control merge operation's
    // index result is not used throughout the IR
    if (!indexResult.use_empty())
      continue;

    // Now, we create a new merge operation at the same position in the IR as
    // the control merge we are replacing. The merge has the exact same inputs
    // as the control merge
    builder.setInsertionPoint(cmergeOp);
    handshake::MergeOp newMergeOp = builder.create<handshake::MergeOp>(
        cmergeOp.getLoc(), cmergeOp->getOperands());

    // Then, replace the control merge's first result (the selected input) with
    // the single result of the newly created merge operation
    Value mergeRes = newMergeOp.getResult();
    cmergeOp.getResult().replaceAllUsesWith(mergeRes);

    // Finally, we can delete the original control merge, whose results have
    // no uses anymore
    cmergeOp->erase();
  }

  return success();
}
```

Again, we simply iterate over all `circt::handshake::ControlMergeOp` and, for those that have no uses to their index result, replace them with simpler *merges*. To achieve that, we create a new `merge` (with the same inputs/operands as the `control_merge`) at the location of the existing `control_merge` using `builder.create<handshake::MergeOp>(...)`, rewire the circuit appropriately, and erase the now unused *control merge*. We again use `llvm::make_early_inc_range` for the same reason as before.

We have now finished implementing our circuit transformation! Rebuild the project and re-run the following to see the transformed IR printed on stdout.

```sh
$ ./bin/dynamatic-opt tutorials/CreatingPasses/test/creating-passes.mlir --tutorial-handshake-my-simplify-merge-like
```
```mlir
module {
  handshake.func @eraseSingleInputMerge(%arg0: none, ...) -> none attributes {argNames = ["start"], resNames = ["out0"]} {
    %0 = return %arg0 : none
    end %0 : none
  }
  handshake.func @downgradeIndexLessControlMerge(%arg0: i32, %arg1: i32, %arg2: none, ...) -> i32 attributes {argNames = ["arg0", "arg1", "start"], resNames = ["out0"]} {
    %0 = merge %arg0, %arg1 : i32
    %1 = return %0 : i32
    end %1 : i32
  }
  handshake.func @isMyArgZero(%arg0: i32, %arg1: none, ...) -> i1 attributes {argNames = ["arg0", "start"], resNames = ["out0"]} {
    %0 = constant %arg1 {value = 0 : i32} : i32
    %1 = arith.cmpi eq, %arg0, %0 : i32
    %trueResult, %falseResult = cond_br %1, %arg1 : none
    %2 = merge %trueResult : none
    %3 = constant %2 {value = true} : i1
    %4 = br %3 : i1
    %5 = merge %falseResult : none
    %6 = constant %5 {value = false} : i1
    %7 = br %6 : i1
    %result, %index = control_merge %2, %5 : none, index
    %8 = mux %index [%4, %7] : index, i1
    %9 = return %8 : i1
    end %9 : i1
  }
}
```

Compared to the input IR, we can see that:
- `eraseSingleInputMerge` lost its single-input `merge`.
- `downgradeIndexLessControlMerge` had its `control_merge` turned into a simpler `merge`.
- `isMyArgZero` lost its two single-input `merge`s at the top of the function, and its two first `control_merge`s were downgraded to `merge`s (the last one wasn't as its index result is used by the `mux`).

Congratulations! Your dataflow circuits will now be faster and smaller!

## Conclusion

In this chapter, we described in details the full process of creating an MLIR pass from scratch and implemented a simple *Handshake*-level IR transformation as an example. We verified that the pass works as intended using some simple test inputs that we ran through `dynamatic-opt`.

Unfortunately, it turns out that our pass misses some optimization opportunities that it should ideally be able to catch. Consider our last test function in `tutorials/test/creating-passes.mlir`. As we observed in the previous section, two of its index-less `control_merge`s got downgraded to `merge`s, which is expected. These `merge`s, however, could further be removed from the IR since they have a single input, but our pass fails to accomplish this. Generally speaking, the problem is that optimizing these initial `controL_merge`s is, according to how we defined our pass, a two-steps process (first downgrading, then erasure). However, our pass performs the *merge* erasure step *before* the *control merge* downgrading step and then never goes back to it. We could simply fix this issue by reversing the order of these steps, or running our pass a second time on the already transformed IR (doing so is usually an indication of bad design). These solutions will work for this particular pass, which only performs two different optimizations, but what if we had a pass that matched and transformed 10 different IR constructs? How would we know in which order to apply the transformations to get the most optimized IR possible in all cases? Would there exist such an order? The answer to our problem is called *greedy pattern rewriting*, and we will cover it in this tutorial's [next chapter](3.GreedyPatternRewriting.md#greedy-pattern-rewriting).
